Ghidra extension for decompiling code from a Unity IL2CPP game to C#.

## ➡️ Usage

> Note that it is powered by GPT4 so will require an OpenAI account to decompile functions.

1. Get an OpenAI platform account
   - [Get access to the OpenAI API](https://platform.openai.com/signup)
   - Generate an API key and save it somewhere safe
1. Get game outputs from Il2CppDumper
   - Install [Il2CppDumper](https://github.com/Perfare/Il2CppDumper)
   - Dump outputs (example command below)
     ```sh
     ./Il2CppDumper /path/to/game/GameAssembly.dll /path/to/game/resources/global-metadata.dat ./il2cpp_out
     ```
1. Set up Ghidra project
   - Install [Ghidra](https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra/releases)
   - Run `ghidraRun` -> create new project -> Import game code file (`GameAssembly.dll`)
   - Open game file -> auto analyze (default options) -> wait until done (could be an hour or more)
   - File -> Parse C source -> add `il2cpp.h` from Il2CppDumper output -> parse and wait until done
   - Window -> Script manager -> add Il2CppDumper directory (the one containing `ghidra_with_structs.py`) -> run `ghidra_with_structs.py` from the list -> follow prompts and wait until done
1. Check that decompilation works correctly
   - Find a function from the game in Ghidra and look through the decompiled C code to make sure it makes sense
   - For my game (Boneworks) the `il2cpp.h` generated by Il2CppDumper was missing a field in all class instances which made all field offsets wrong and caused property accesses to be off by 8 bytes
1. Rename functions (usually exception throwing functions)
   - The script will not run if there are unnamed functions being called (eg. `FUN_1234abcd`) in the method being decompiled
   - Find your function in Ghidra and look at the decompiled C code
   - There should be lots of `if (someVar != (SomeType)0x0) { ... } FUN_1234abcd();` which are null checks (since C# will throw a `NullReferenceException` if `x` is null in `x.y`)
   - Rename the exception function (`FUN_1234abcd` in the example above) to `ThrowNullReferenceException` and mark it as "No Return"
   - In future I may automate this step
1. Install the Il2CppDecompiler.java script
   - Download the [Il2CppDecompiler.java script](./ghidra_scripts/Il2CppDecompiler.java)
   - Open the script manager in Ghidra (Window -> Script Manager)
   - Click the "Manage Script Directories" button
   - Add the directory containing the downloaded Il2CppDecompiler.java script
1. Run the Il2CppDecompiler.java script
   - Navigate to the method you want to decompile
   - Window -> Script Manager -> Il2CppDecompiler -> Follow the prompts

You can also run it in headless mode. First make sure the project is not currently open in Ghidra then run the command from [test-script.sh](./test-script.sh).

## 🛠️ Development

This repo contains an extension which doesn't really do anything yet. I planned to convert Ghidra's P-code (intermediate representation of machine code) to C# and build a UI for viewing/editing decompiled C# inside Ghidra (similar to the existing C decompiler) but this approach was taking too long so I pivoted to writing a script which sends the code to an LLM to do all the work for me. 🤷

### Script

[./ghidra_scripts/Il2CppDecompiler.java](./ghidra_scripts/Il2CppDecompiler.java) contains the LLM-based script. It also still contains the proof-of-concept hacky string replacement approach I started with. You can edit the file as-is, but I like to clone the Ghidra source code, set that up and symlink Il2CppDecompiler.java into one of the ghidra_scripts folders there so that I get autocomplete with doc comments and can go to source of internal Ghidra functions. Run [link.sh](./link.sh) to automatically set that up then edit the [Il2CppDecompiler.java which is linked inside the ghidra directory](./ghidra/Ghidra/Features/Decompiler/ghidra_scripts/Il2CppDecompiler.java).

#### Debugging

You can run the script during development by making sure Ghidra is closed then running [test-script.sh](./test-script.sh). Before first run, make sure you set the variables in the script in [gradle.properties](./gradle.properties) or as environment variables. You can also attach a debugger by running the script like this:

```sh
MODE=debug-suspend ./test-script.sh
```

Note that this script is for Unix systems. You're probably using Windows so you'll have to convert it to a `.bat` script or something. Please open a PR if you do. 😄

### Extension

Note that the extension doesn't do anything yet. I originally intended to build an interface for the decompiled C# code, like the existing interface for decompiled C.

1. Create/modify [gradle.properties](gradle.properties) to contain:
   ```env
   GHIDRA_INSTALL_DIR=<absolute_path_to_your_ghidra_installation>
   ```
1. Then build with:
   ```sh
   gradle
   ```
